I installed the app, opened it up, and started the installation process. This is supposed to take about 8 minutes, and consists of registering with email and password, entering date of birth, gender, place of birth, and finally your address. This is where it already went wrong: I enter my address details, hit submit, and am after a brief wait notified that something went wrong on the network. When I try to hit submit again, it tells me there is already an account with my email address. Sigh.

I backtrack, go back to the opening screen, but now choose to log in instead of signing up and, fair enough, the email and password I chose work to get me in. Before it lets me continue though I need to verify my email, which the app assures me I should have received an email for. I check my inbox, but there's nothing there yet. It's been a little while now, I wait a little longer, then press what looks like a "resend" button. Well actually it's just a bit of text saying "Resend?", it doesn't look like a button at all. When I press it nothing seems to happen. I press it a few more times, try the continue button, nothing on this screen does anything, it's like it's frozen.

A little while later again I suddenly have 9 confirmation emails waiting for me. I guess that "Resend?" was a button after all. So I manage to take this hurdle, then move on to the next one: verifying my identity. Numer26 lets you do that either over videochat through a service called "ID Now", or by going to a German post office and using the PostIdent option. The video chat can be done through the app, or through the browser. I prefer to do this on my laptop, so I log in to their site, and start the process. It's supposed to take two minutes. After about five minutes it's finally my turn in the queue. The person on the other end doesn't speak, but there's a written message that I should state my name and surname. Just as I'm about to do that, suddenly my browser refreshes and the connection is gone. O...K.

I decide to try through the app. It asks me to grant access to my camera, microphone, and all files and documents on the phone. I'm a bit uncomfortable about this last bit but figure it won't let me proceed without it, so I comply. The "two minutes waiting time" turn into something closer to 10 minutes, but finally I get to speak to an operator. It takes a bit of fiddling to get my passport properly into focus, but then he manages to take a picture of it, asks me some more questions to confirm things, and lets me enter a verification code I've just been sent by SMS. It would appear we're all done, but then he suddenly appears worried, letting out a curse. I'm not sure what's up, until he explains me that the screen he saw me in has disppaered, so I can still see and hear him, but not the other way around. He tells me he'll try something, but if the connection gets interupted I will simply have to try again. And truth be told: the connection drops, I try again.

Another queue, by now about forty-five minutes (out of eight) have passed. I get another operator, go through the same process, and a few minutes later my identiy is verified. Phew! According to the site it's supposed to take 2 to 4 days to get my card, according to the email 4 to 7 working days. I can't wait!
