---
title: Grappling with AI
date: 2013-07-05
draft: true
---

I am writing this to help myself get to grips with this particular moment in
time, and its implications for my career, my business, and society.

We are a few years in to the current Gen AI hype wave, the size of which is
staggering. In my 20 plus years in this business I've seen a lot of hype cycles
come and go, but I've never seen a technology being pushed this aggressively,
with this much money and force behind it.

It's being presented as inevitable, it's changing how we do things, it's
changing how society operates, it's changing the world. You may not like it, and
it may seem like going along with the "inevitable" narrative makes it even more
inevitable. But it's important to be clear eyed about reality, and considering
the rate of adoption, the amount of funding, and the lack of broad societal
mobilization, or pushback from governments or other entities big and powerful
enough to make a difference, it's a done deal. We have entered the AI age.

If you're part of my fediverse bubble, this is probably an incredibly depressing
realization, and you may want to sit with that for a moment, mourn the world we
lost, and then try to get to grips with it, as I am doing here. There's power in
accepting what is, and to plan and organise from there.

If you're more like the people I talk to day to day, you may wonder why I
state something so obvious, or what there is to be sad about. Isn't this
technology simply amazing?

There's a long history of technology being adopted rapidly, without really
considering the dangers, the downsides, the wider implications. Not that people
aren't voicing those concerns, or even backing them up with data, but it's not a
message the early adopters want to hear. Sometimes "progress" is invoked, hasn't
technology made the world a better place? The people who stand to gain from new
technology will be quick to assure you it's all safe and ethical. People who
claim otherwise are scaremongering, technophobes, fringe.

And there's a whole slew of documented downsides to AI technology. We are in the
middle of a climate emergency. We used to worry about the carbon footprint of
bitcoin. That seems quaint now considering the amount of power hungry data
centers that are being built at breakneck speed, outstripping any conceivable
capacity to implement renewables. They also guzzle up water for cooling, at a
time when climate change is making draughts more common, and access to water
more unpredictable.

Some will counter this argument by saying models will get more efficient, and
that AI itself will help solve climate change. Maybe those things will be true
tomorrow, or maybe not, but they are not true today. AI is pushing back climate
goals, pushing us further into the danger zone. That too is a reality to accept.

Then there's what AI will do to us cognitively and societally, eroding critical
thinking skills, inhibting learning processes, weaponizing misinformation and
propaganda, dehumanizing our lives and interactions. In this area things are
less clear cut, in that it's too early to predict exactly how these impacts will
be felt. But that it is changing the zeitgeist is clear, and I imagine younger
generations will have quite a different worldview because of it. Expect a
reshaping of business, government, politics, ideology. We are entering a
completely uncharted information environment.

It's worth noting that UNESCO already in 2021 published a [Recommendation on the
ethics of Artificial
Intelligence](https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380455/PDF/380455eng.pdf.multi),
which its 193 members are expected to adopt. But implementation of these
recommendations is voluntary, and it sure does seem like governments are much
more concerned with not missing the AI goldrush, let alone that they have any
interest in imposing restrictions on businesses based on ethical considerations.

The reason I'm writing all of that is not to invoke your outrage, or even to
share mine, it's because I'm capitulating. I can't change these things, I can't
stop them. I have to accept that this is the world I now live in. There are a
lot of things in this world I would love to be different
