---
title: My Position on AI, LLMs, and (shudders) "vibe coding" 
date: 2025-09-15
draft: true
---

I've been a strong AI sceptic since the current hype wave started. I've seen a
few of these hype waves come and go in my twenty-odd years as a software
engineer. I understand that climate change is the single biggest existential
crisis facing humanity, and the current GPU-farm landrush is _not_ helping with
that.

I worry about the weaponisation of misinformation, propaganda, and manipulation.
I lament the creatives who spent a lifetime honing their skills and developing
their style and creative vision, who are being replaced by slop machines. And
while I think copyright is deeply flawed, it makes me bitter to think of all the
legal action against bittorrent users, Pirate Bay, SciHub, to think of Aaron
Swartz, and to then see big tech doing the same things but at an unfathomably
larger scale, unchallenged, with impunity. The double standard is staggering.

And yet, you are going to see me post in the near future about LLMs, about AI
and AI-assisted coding. For a little while now I have actively been exploring
that space. Does that cause me a good bit of cognitive dissonance? Absolutely.

But as a software professional, as a consultant who helps people navigate the
industry, I have to have an informed opinion. The only way to do that is to
really dig in and get first hand experience. Unfortunately, I don't think this
one is simply going to blow over.

It's also a scary time in the industry. We've noticed first hand how budgets
have dried up, how the mass layoffs over the last few years have altered the
landscape. And yet there's still as much capital as before looking for good
investments. There's ample funding available, _if_ your company does _something
AI_. Gaiwan is a small company, but including dependents there are a dozen
people who depend on my business decisions for their daily income. I owe it to
them to think about these things, and to make sure that we stay relevant.

Perhaps this bubble will pop dramatically, but I'm getting the sense it's going
to have a lot of staying power. People are throwing anything and everything AI
at the wall, and some of it is sticking.

And so I am trying to be informed, dispassionately. Neither a hype man nor a
hater. Fully conscious of the externalities, of the risks, of the shortcomings.
And as I've done over the past two decades, charting my own path. Never
accepting best practices or industry standards as gospel, but critically
evaluating, and helping people around me make better more informed decisions as
well, including my colleagues at Gaiwan, our clients and partners, and the
community of practice with whom I'm hoping to share my learnings.
