---
title: Towards a European Software Industry
draft: true
date: 2025-01-25
---

> Technological change is accelerating rapidly. Europe largely missed out on the
> digital revolution led by the internet and the productivity gains it brought:
> in fact, the productivity gap between the EU and the US is largely explained
> by the tech sector. The EU is weak in the emerging technologies that will
> drive future growth. Only four of the world’s top 50 tech companies are
> European. — From the "Draghi Report" ([European Competitiveness, Looking
> Ahead](https://commission.europa.eu/topics/strengthening-european-competitiveness/eu-competitiveness-looking-ahead_en#paragraph_47059))

Since the COVID years the US economy has outpaced the European one, and policy
makers are increasingly eager to copy recipes from US policy and industry, in
order to boost European productivity and competitiveness. 

While I won't speak to whether that is a wise strategy in general, as a software
professional and enterpreneur I want to caution against trying to mimic the
American software industry wholesale. Instead I think we have the opportunity to
develop a Software Industry with European Characteristics, one that marches to
its own beat, that strengthens European regions economically, educationally, and
culturally, and that ultimately allows Europe to develop a leadership position,
by developing a software ecosystem that is everything the US software industry,
and especially Silicon Valley, is not.

## The World's Biggest Tech Companies

Eight of the world's 10 richest people gathered their wealth through American
tech companies, for six of these eight their company predominantly manufactures
software. The value Silicon Valley has managed to capture in the last two
decades is staggering. Obviously technology has become a critical part of our
lives, which both in the private and professional sphere are ever more digitized
and mediated by online platforms. Still, the level of concentration in a limited
number of mega companies is perhaps suprising. It can be explained through a
number of properties that are unique to, or at least especially pronounced, in
software.

Software has remarkable economy of scale. While a company producing physical
goods can generally bring its marginal cost down as their market share grows,
the marginal cost for an additional user of a software product is close to zero.

Software allows for a remarkable level of vendor lock-in. When buying a new car
people will consider multiple brands to choose from. They all get you from A to
B. But once you are bought in to for instance to Apple ecosystem, using iPhone
phones and Mac computers, the barier to switch to anything else is high. You
lose access to previous purchases, communication, online services, and various
integrations that are Apple-exclusive. So while other phones and computers in
principle get you from A to B just the same, and may even be considered more
advanced or better value, the cost to switching is often prohibitive.

The same is true for most online platforms, which combine both functionality and
data storage, so that changing vendors will not only make you lose access to the
old vendor's feature set, but also to any data — documents, activity,
communications, contacts — in the old vendor's system. In this regard progress
has been made of course, with the EU now mandating that companies provide a
machine readable export of user data, but we are still far from this data being
_portable_.

For platforms with a social component there is an obvious network effect that
allows a small number of players to capture virtually an entire market. After
all, everyone wants to be where everyone else is.

## Surveillance Capitalism

While we think of Facebook and Google as being in social media and search
respectively, both are really first and foremost advertising companies. Through
data collection on an epic scale they are able to target, predict, and
manipulate the behavior of groups and individuals. Amazon is similar, an
extractive middleman operating a finely tuned machine that maximizes
consumerism.

While European policy makers might love to see a European Facebook, Google, or
Amazon — it sure would help GDP growth, and perhaps tax revenue — we have to ask
ourselves what value advertising really brings to society. These are not
companies that synergize with others to create a healthy industrial ecosystem,
but rather monopolies which increasingly dictate the information environment,
which increase the cost to participate and compete in the marketplace, and
ultimately stifle real innovation.

## A Crisis of Legitimacy

While the value the software industry captures continues to rise, the tide of
popular sentiment has been falling for some time now. Enshittification was
perhaps the most popular new word of 2024, and we are all increasingly conscious
of how we are being watched, manipulated, and extorted by companies who simply
do not care about, or actively seem to relish in, the damage their products
cause on our lifes, communities, environment, and democracies.

There is increasing awareness of the ideology that has captured the minds of the
Silicon Valley powerful, known as
[TESCREAL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TESCREAL), which is frankly _weird as
hell_, but also plain dangerous, threatening to vastly exacerbate the climate
emergency, posing a threat to democracy and rule of law, and destabilising
geopolitics. Are these really the role models we want to be copying?

There is a real hunger out there for tech that actually serves it users, that
isn't full of dark patterns and surveillance, that solves an actual problem, and
isn't trying to hook people on AI with every interaction. This hungers exists
both with individuals, but also with many companies and corporations, who feel
increasingly held hostage by their vendors.

It is time we imagine a software ecosystem based on European values, that
synergizes with society and the economy at large, to help create value, rather
than merely being middlemen who capture and extract value.

What's more, we can do this outside of the logic of the hype cycle. We don't
need blockchain or AI, or whatever the next thing bandwagon is that is scheduled
to wipe out the progress we've made in increased energy efficiency.. There is
still so much low hanging fruit, basic problems that software can solve, or can
solve better, for individuals and for industry, with the tools we already have.

## European Software

Now that we've set the stage, how can we grow a European Software 





I've been thinking a lot about what a healthy European Software ecosystem would
look like in the context of today's world. What direction should EU policy go to
incentivize the kind of industry that will serve us best in the long run.

This has been on my mind ever since the Draghi report, a report by former ECB
president Mario Draghi, about European productivity and competitiveness. It
implies that the EU should essentially try to mimic the USA, in particular
Silicon Valley. I think that would be a huge mistake, and that instead we should
be asking ourselves how to be everything that Silicon Valley is not.

The American IT industry is characterized by tech giants that dwarf their
competitors. Are these companies really orders of magnitudes more innovative and
productive than their peers, as their valuation would suggest? Not really.
Mostly would these companies have managed to do is leverage vendor lock-in and
network effects, sometimes starting from an early mover advantage, to quickly
establish monopoly positions.

While policy folks might see the lack of FAA(N|M)G sized companies on this side
of the pond as a European failure, the way I see the existence of these
companies is itself a policy failure, which distorts the market, and limits
competition and innovation.

The EU instead should do whatever it can to level the playing fields. This
starts with Open Standards. We need standards for both data at rest, and for
data interchange, for business, industry, and consumer software. For identity
providers and data storage layers.

These standards need to be developed in the open, with input from practicioners
and stakeholders. They need to be general purpose, so not skewed towards any
specific vendor. They need to be straightforward, so they can easily be
implemented in a variety of languages and platforms. They need to be based on
existing lower level standards and best practices, like RDF or JSON-LD. And they
need freely available open source reference implementations. And finally but
crucially, they need to address true data portability.

Adoption of these standards should be achieved by a carrots-then-sticks
approach. Provide incentives like tax discounts to early movers who make their
applications standards-compliant. Over time switch to disavantaging, fining, and
finally disallowing products that don't comply.

While a standards-based ecosystem will make it harder for a single company to
utterly dominate the market, it will allow a broad ecosystem of small to
mid-size companies to flourish and compete. A Mittelstand, if you will, which
has always been a key part of Europe's economic engine.

This brings us to the second pillar: localization. Right now we are in a
situation where the whole world has to adopt solutions dreamt up in California.
We are a continent with dozens of countries, regions, languages, and cultures.
We should reject monoculture and the dominance of a single cultural hegemon. Let
local companies solve problems in a way that makes the most sense for their
region's needs, concerns, way of working, and energy constraints.
